---
layout: page
title: "Introduction"
description: "Introduction to the "Data Science Biocultural Diversity Action (DSBD) Framework"
---
## The Setting:

In 2020, a new pandemic began, and the modern world became acutely aware of several of its failings. This pandemic highlighted various forms of societal inequities, that manifested in the overwhelming of healthcare systems, extreme governmental bureaucracy and corruption, and even extreme forms of systemic discrimination and racism. Most countries urged their citizens to remain indoors to slow the spread of the virus. 

This time of isolation, however, did facilitate a much needed period of reflection in society. Some families that were confined together became closer, and technology bridged the gap with communicated with persons over long distances. This time of reflection also allowed persons to rethink current societal institutions, the industries that are prioritized and promoted over others, and it emboldened others actively seek increased equality for all. 

Notably, as modern commerce ground to a halt, the environment appeared to thrive. In some areas, the air quality improved, others noted less accidental animal killings along transportation routes. Moreover, wildlife began to flourish in some areas and even appeared to begin venture out into once-bustling commercial areas. This period of lockdown has not beneficial for all animals; in extreme cases, the policing of poachers is reduced, and animals in captivity that rely on tourism and public gathers are noting reduced funding. However, previously problematic proposals for policy changes, have been reconsidered and there are renewed efforts to investigate biodiversity conservation. On a small scale, some institutions have been able to secure approvals for extending nature reserves. On a larger scale, despite some regulatory rollbacks, as of July 7th, climate activists saw celebrated the abandonment of the Atlantic Coast Pipeline, and the shut-down and emptying of the Dakota Access Pipeline pending a long-awaited thorough environmental review.

While we are indeed still far away from noting the true societal and environmental cost of the pandemic, global citizens can strive to set policies in place and continuously assess ourselves in these areas, to ensure that our situation can only improve. True value can be ascertained from studies in the areas of Digital Humanities and Biocultural Diversity (BCD), that specifically focus on the intrinsic connection between societal structures and its possible harmony with their surroundings. The former can be interpreted as being at the intersection of computing or digital technologies and the disciplines of the humanities; it can be the strategic a systematic implementation and utilization of digital resources on the study of the humanities and further analysis of their application. For example, this can take the form of creating digital art using Neural Style Transfer techniques and Tensorflow tools, creating new literature from recurrent neural networks, as well as deciphering ancient text from images and scans of relics. As co-founder and director of Terralingua, a pioneer in this area of study, Luisa Maffi has explained the interrelated (and possibly coevolved)  nature of the diversity of all forms of life within a complex socio-ecological adaptive system. According to Maffi, biological, cultural, and linguistic complexity add to various forms of the diversity of life. Moreover, momentum is gathering for BCD to be included in the "conceptual repertoire" of researchers and policy-makers.

Motivation is essential to change, however, to properly allocate resources, data collection and analysis should occur. Data science offers a plethora of tools in which to explore our world. However, it is often a difficult task to decipher what tools to use and when. Developing the skill and capacity to achieve this requires quite a bit of study. It also requires a significant degree of concern and compassion to dedicate resources into research that may not have a direct, immediate, or substantial financial reward. 

## The Goal:

I aim to provide a framework in which Data Science can be utilized for Digital Humanities and Biocultural Diversity efforts which may lead to a more wholesome and sustainable future. This is an interdisciplinary exploration of the data science's hierarchy of needed skills, through a novel digital humanities and biocultural diversity topic lens. I will present novel diagnosis and prescriptive frameworks for assessing the current state of a country and exploring the prescription of various modern data science tools towards ameliorating its status utilizing the least amount of resources. The goal is to have this system simplified enough to allow to enable citizen scientists to make valuable academic contributions.

## The Foundational Framework

Since the undertaking of societal and environmental improvement is related to humanitarian efforts, a simplistic humanitarian framework was selected as the base to be molded with various data science concepts and tools. In his 1943 paper for Psychological Review, “A Theory of Human Motivation", Abraham Maslow put forth a visual representation of his psychological theory. The model was a five-tiered hierarchy of human needs as a motivational theory in psychology, however, later versions included eight tiers. It was suggested that the lower tier needs must be satisfied before individuals can attend to those above, while later noting that a need may not be satisfied to the fullest extent before the next need arises.

In the time of this pandemic, many employers may lean on this framework as a means to better understand and motivate employees as the work dynamics and settings may have changed. Some employers may have had to facilitate remote working for the first time, and others may have had to deal with higher than usual numbers of remote workers. Those that can retain employees in their usual settings, now have to contend with increased safety and cleaning practices; the workflow and overall productivity and motivation of the works may be impacted by the rigor of new regiments.

As old as this framework is, it continues to be utilized in explaining motivation across different fields at micro and macro-levels. On an individual level, researchers recently used this framework as a means to "Understanding Adolescent Depressive Symptoms Over Time", and to identify the factors contributing to student nurse success. This theory was also utilized at a macro-level, it is been applied to economic development and national intelligence.

Some persons familiar with project management might be able to envision a connection between Maslow's hierarchy of needs and the field of technology. For example, some would liken the rigidity of the "Waterfall approach, a linear development process, to the rigidity of the Maslow's initial attempts at interpreting the incremental steps of his model.

Notably, it has also been informally applied to the field of data science. While unable to find many scholarly publications on the matter, a few data science enthusiasts have attempted to explore a hierarchy of data science needs; a visual interpretation of the skills associated with this fairly new field. In 2017, Monica Rogati was credited with the creation of a similar pyramid structure that focuses on what skills impact the careers of individual data scientists; at the base would be data collection, and then movement and storage, exploration and transformation, aggregation and labeling, and ended with learning and optimization (related to artificial intelligence, deep learning and well as experimentation and simple machine learning algorithms among other details).  In 2018, Hugh Williams revisited this framework and began to consider the unique data science needs of individual companies; he incorporated the need to consider the needs of specialist companies and well as generalist companies.

## The Flaws:

Despite its ubiquity of application, Maslow's framework is not without critique. While it has been repeatedly proven to evoke innate recognition of human nature in oneself and others, some contest the methodology for his studies. Some stated that some of his terms were too ambiguous; some argued that non-human needs should also be considered, and that "self-actualization" far too open to interpretation. Maslow was also said to have been very selective with the individuals chosen for his research; he selected pursued highly productive and accomplished individuals, his rankings were problematic when attempting to address gender and societal differences.

Notably, Maslow's hierarchy of needs is often used to explain why projects have failed, particularly the five-tiered version. It is often used as a tool of cautionary consideration to project leaders. Despite the existence of an eight-tiered version that can be viewed as more introspective and optimistic, it is lesser-known.

## The Proposed Framework:

With the reenvisioning of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, the public might have a more positive perspective of this pyramid. Those wishing to enact change in their spaces can be reassured that each completed project is a step closer to a better understanding of what is happening and what can then be done. Moreover, this novel approach can be applied as a self-assessment tool when reviewing past works and revaluating career choices; it can serve as a means of ascertaining if one's choices have effectively satisfied any of their needs and if it promoted personal progress. It may also offer direction to those considering a career in data science yet lack sufficient exposure to practical applications of concepts. 

This framework may very well be useful in both formal and informal educational settings. The broad field of Data Science can benefit from its implementation, as well as the areas of Digital Humanities and Biocultural Diversity. It may be considered as part of one's introductory course material in all the aforementioned areas, as this may better direct them to areas of interest for further research. Additionally, it may be used as revision materials for graduating students, as a means of ensuring they achieved a well-rounded education. Such an introspective, yet comprehensive framework could then be viewed as a truly motivational, inspirational, and aspirational. 

The positive structure of the framework would allow users to better grasp the practical application of data science concepts and therefore generate more quantifiably valid datasets, models, and concepts. The projects being attempted will not eradicate the need for professionally trained data scientists nor lessen the importance and sophistication of the field, but foster a sense of interest in it through accessibility, while promoting greater societal and environmental awareness. The collection of various forms of data is now more commonplace than ever before. With increased access to technology and a heightened awareness of societal and environmental issues, individuals and small groups utilizing this framework may be better capable of assessing situations that require change.

Finally, it is crucial to note that the Agile Manifesto specifically provided guidance rather than a prescriptive methodology, and Scrum was stated to be a management framework with self-organizing teams working towards incremental product development.  While project management frameworks like Scrum, Agile, and even frameworks specifically catered to wildlife conservation do exist, the highlighted conditional nature of the application of Maslow's hierarchy emphasizes its critical advantage for resource-strapped individual researchers or small underfunded teams. Bearing this in mind, Scrum, Agile, and other project management frameworks can indeed be utilized when attempting to pursue each personal project. This framework aims to aid in providing project inspiration and goal acquisition through a guided structure. 

As an aspiring data scientist, I hope to contribute as much as possible to the field, and society at large, especially in the form of education. To address my relationship with Maslow's hierarchy of needs, I have proposed a framework that will be called the "Data Science Biocultural Diversity Action (DSBD) Framework. It will explore the topics of Maslow's hierarchy's tiers within the context of biocultural diversity and digital humanities, while also exploring various data science concepts and tools. 

I am currently rethinking this five-tier model and pivoting to an eight-tier model.

## The Framework's Levels:

- one item Physiological needs will be explored in the context of "Flora": (sustainability projects through image recognition like plant disease identification for endemic/vital crops), and Fauna (spectrographic analysis -the bioacoustic study of vulnerable species, and noise pollution).
- one item Safety and security: Akin to Finance (economics and index construction; the impact of the tourism industry).
- one item Love and belonging: Akin to Fluency (connectivity based on ease of communicating; language acquisition, literature and music, and neurolinguistics related to traumatic brain injury/aphasia).
- one item Self-esteem: Akin to Feelings (sentiment analysis/surveys- exploration small island state perceptions of their language, culture, economics, and environment; what they believe non-natives' perceptions are, and actual non-native perceptions).
- one item Self-actualization: Akin to Awareness (exploration of pedagogy in data science; citizen science projects; app development and gamification of concepts).

## The Outcome:

With this proposed framework, the order in which one can pursue the topics is not as significant as increased satisfaction the user will receive with each completed area of knowledge unlocked. However, working through all levels will indeed result in a meaningful contribution to the field of data science, society at large, and hopefully, facilitate the user with a true sense of self-actualization.



{% include JB/setup %}
