---
layout: post
title: "Safety and security needs: topics related to Assets"
description: "Safety and security needs: Assets"
tags: [Assets]
---
{% include JB/setup %}


## __*Safety and security needs*__ can be explored as topics related to __*Assets*__.

+ Assessing the link between crime and language. Could miscommunication between prestige and heritage language speakers hinder legal defenses? Are there any metrics on lawyers' multilingual lawyers on the island? Are there any laws related to representation requirements (do lawyers assess the language needs of clients to decide how best to assist them)? What are the rates of incarceration of predominantly Saint Lucian Kwéyòl language speakers? What are the inmate metrics per district of origin (there is a popular belief that most Saint Lucian Kwéyòl language speakers are located in the Southern part of the country)?
 

[Lawyer demographics](https://llord1.github.io/2020/07/08/AssetsSLUlaw)

+ What impact, if any, does tourism have on the vitality of the Saint Lucian Kwéyòl language? What factors elevated the prestige language on over the heritage language? This entails observing the number of ports of entry per district, number of tourist attractions per district, number of hotels per district, number of jobs related to tourism per district, number of educational facilities per district, number of main government offices per district. The final details may lead to a discussion of language hotspots; and a possible explanation of their existence.


[Tourism's impact on Saint Lucian languages](https://llord1.github.io/2020/07/08/AssetsTourism)