---
layout: post
title: "Assets: Assessing the link between crime and language"
description: "Assessing the link between crime and language"
tags: [Assets]
---
{% include JB/setup %}



### __*Safety and security needs*__ can be explored as topics related to __*Assets*__.

### Introduction:

The American Bar Association does gather Legal Profession Statistics; their current statistical data is used to assist with research on lawyers and the legal profession. Their website notes data on the topics of Lawyer Demographics (including matters of Disability, Women, and Minority/People of Color). It also encompasses Justice System Statistics (including topics on Public Perception of Justice System/Lawyers and the Justice System), Court Statistics (including Cases Filed, and Criminal Justice Statistics). This association also notes the topics of Law Students and Education and Legal Salaries (and related Attrition/Retention data).

Lawyer demographics in Saint Lucia do not appear to be gathered. A representative of The Central Statistical Office of Saint Lucia stated that the data in the country's "Labourforce survey is not disaggregated in such a way to get a count of all lawyers". It was also stated that since the Labourforce survey "utilizes a sample if it were to give a figure it would not be representative". 

### Questions:

+ Assessing the link between crime and language. Could miscommunication between prestige and heritage language speakers hinder legal defenses? Are there any metrics on lawyers' multilingual lawyers on the island? Are there any laws related to representation requirements (do lawyers assess the language needs of clients to decide how best to assist them)? What are the rates of incarceration of predominantly Saint Lucian Kwéyòl language speakers? What are the inmate metrics per district of origin (there is a popular belief that most Saint Lucian Kwéyòl language speakers are located in the Southern part of the country)?


### Methodology: 

Chi-square test of independence

 *Survey design (questions)*

+ *Which category below includes your age?*

19 or younger

20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-44

45-49

50-54

55-59
 
60-64

65-69 

70 or older

Choose not to respond

This question is posed as a standard demographic question, yet it is also important as speaks to the current and future state of the legal linguistic environment. Noting age may highlight multilingualism trends among age groups. For example, if multilingualism is more prominent in the younger lawyers, then the projection of multilingual representation would be positive. However, if multilingual tendencies are clustered among older lawyers, then this study may serve to highlight needed points of improvement in the legal system in an increasingly multilingual society. Additionally, the age range chosen was based on the fact that lawyers typically obtain higher education levels beyond high-school, and remain in practice past the age of 65 [source].

+ *What is your gender?* 

Woman 

Man 

My gender identity is not listed above 

____________________

Choose not to respond

Gender identification is another standard demographic question, however, it is needed here to highlight if there are any differences in linguistics interests among the lawyers. Females are often believed to be more capable of and interested in linguistic acquisition and practice.


+ *How would you describe your ethnicity/race? (Tick one box only) *

White/North European 

Mediterranean (eg Greek, Italian, Turkish) 

Black Afro-Caribbean 

Indian subcontinent 

SE Asian/Chinese 

Mixed parentage 

Other (please specify)

____________________

Not known 	

Choose not to respond


Identifying participant ethnicity/race is another standard demographic inquiry, nevertheless, it is needed here to highlight if there are any differences in linguistics interests among the lawyers based on their backgrounds. One's household and upbringing may shape or influence one's interests. Multiculturalism is quite prevalent in the Caribbean, however, one's multilingualism might be impacted by one's upbringing. While formal education may be a primary factor in one's language acquisition, various states of immigration over generations, or other forms of diversity in one's household, might influence their linguistic capacities.


+ *In what law-related environment are you currently working?*

In private practice, in a firm with less than 5 lawyers

In private practice, in a firm with 5-15 lawyers

In private practice, in a firm with 16-25 lawyers

In private practice, in a firm with 26-50 lawyers

In private practice, in a firm with 51 or more lawyers

In government

In a not for profit organization

In an academic institution

Other (please specify)

____________________

Choose not to respond


+ *How many languages do you speak/understand?*

1

2

3

4

5+

Choose not to respond


+ *Can you please select all that apply?*

English

Latin

Saint Lucian Kwéyòl (Antillean Creole/Patios)

French

Spanish

Dutch

Portuguese

Hindi

Mandarin 

Other (please specify)

____________________

Choose not to respond


+ *If you speak more than one language, how did you learn this language?*

As part of my school education (required)

As part of my school education (elective)

As a personal interest (for career, personal enrichment, etc.)

As part of communicating with my family and friends

Choose not to respond


If you do speak more than one language, has this skill been crucial to representing/communicating with a client?

Yes

No

Have you ever declined to represent a client due to perceived language barriers?

Yes

No

 






[Back to: Safety and security needs: Assets](https://llord1.github.io/2020/07/08/Assets)